is Israel in breach of the UN Court's
ruling the international court of
justice ordered its military to end acts
of genocide as well as to prevent
incitement to commit genocidal acts but
with more Palestinians killed in Gaza
every day who can force Israel to comply
this is Inside
Story
hello welcome to the program I'm Adrien
finegan the United Nations top court has
ordered Israel to prevent and punish
actions that could lead to or incite
genocide in Gaza it also ordered much
needed humanitarian Aid and basic
Services be allowed into the strip the
ruling was widely viewed as a step
towards ending Israel's war but in the
weeks that have followed troops have
continued to act with impunity
intensifying their indiscriminate
killing of of Palestinians and now prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu is
threatening a possible military
offensive in Rafa the southernmost point
of the territory Palestinians are
trapped with nowhere to go so what can
be done to end Israel's brutality we
have plenty to discuss with our guests
but first this
report on January the 26th the United
Nations highest court determined there
was plausible evidence of genocide in
Gaza it was a historic moment for
Palestinians the international court of
justice then ordered Israel to take all
measures within its power to prevent
acts that violate the genocide
convention but in the days that followed
Israel seems to have ignored the ruling
in fact according to un expert
Franchesca albane appears to be in
breach of the Court's orders in just
over two weeks since the icj ruling the
Army has killed more than 2 th000
Palestinians in Gaza bringing the death
toll to more than
28,000 since October the 7th in the same
period over 3,000 people were injured
the health Ministry warns these numbers
will only rise with victims found under
the rubble every day Alban points to the
continued demolition of infrastructure
and the ongoing lack of medical supplies
food and clean water as further examples
of Israel's violation of the Court's
orders it could get worse prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu has ordered his
military to draw up plans for a ground
offensive in Rafa in the southernmost
tip of Gaza more than 1.4 million
displaced Palestinians 2third of the
population are Sheltering in the city un
facilities there are operating at many
times above capacity schools mosques
churches and Halls have become play
places of Refuge people are crammed into
tents and makeshift shelters While
others are sleeping on the streets this
is would be disaster if they had launch
an attack on
ra U they will be the master of genocide
uh criminal war criminal I could say
while the icj ruling may be a legal
victory for Palestinians many are asking
how beneficial it is if Israel defies
its orders in
Gaza Veronica Pedroza Al jazer for
inside
story so let's bring in our guests for
today's discussion from Rafa in southern
Gaza we're joined by yusf hamash a Gaza
resident and advocacy officer for the
Norwegian Refugee Council here in Doha
is Manan Rabani co-editor of Jalia an
online news website he's also a
non-resident fellow at the center for
conflict in humanitarian studies and
from London we're joined by Neeve Gordon
a professor of international law and
human rights at Queen Mary University
Neeve is also a board member of the
international State Crime initiative
gentlemen welcome to you all let's start
with you Yousef is there any sign there
that Israel is complying with the icj's
orders yeah unfortunately we didn't see
any difference either between before the
decision have been made by the icj or
after there is not not the not tangible
until now we are talking about the daily
average for the trucks that allow to
enter through ra Crossing and Shalom is
158 truck and the need is more than a
thousand per day so I don't
unfortunately the displaced families in
Rafa didn't feel any tangible change
with the amount of Aid that came into
Gaza but and add to that the
catastrophic situation in the northern
part of Gaza and Gaza City which
unfortunately until now our our hands
are tight and we cannot we are not able
to provide assistance to the northern
part of Gaza because we don't have an
access it was allowed previously to it
was allowed to enter for a few amount of
food items and after that unfortunately
after the attack of one of the eight
trucks that have been delivered by Ona
and the coastal Road none of the tracks
have been sent to the northern part of
Gaza and currently the the population
there more than 400,000 citizen are
living through a famine a literal famine
we used to call it we used to call and
demand that we there is the situation in
the north is on the verge of a faming
currently we have a faming families
there are eating animal food or looking
for anything to feed their children and
unfortunately they don't have any
options in front of the need of their
children in the northern part of Gaza to
provide them anything it's a
catastrophic situation in Gaza
unfortunately the situation haven't been
changed and youf people must be
particularly worried about Israel's
threat to launch a ground offensive
there in Rafa
uh where will people
go and that's the question everyone's
had the Raa families who are being
displaced the Rafa have been displaced
several times this is now they became
kind of expert in displacement
unfortunately all the options that we
had before and personally I live in the
northern part of Gaza in jabal I have
been I have fled from a place to the
other four or five times now I don't
have any other options and all of us
have been trapped in in Rafa and more
than 60% of the housing unit in general
of Gaza Strip have been destroyed the
remaining housing units are in Rafa so
even if they were pushed somewhere else
from Rafa to be forced to flee again
unfortunately there is no options we
don't have any place to go the Gaza City
and the northern part of Gaza is totally
destroyed the middle area is under
bombardment most of the time on a daily
basis you're talking about loads of
bombardment several
areas and other areas now we are trapped
between the Israeli tanks and the
Egyptian border from the other side so
even Rafa as as a city doesn't have the
the capacity to manage the need of all
of these amount of people whove been
displaced in Rafa more than 1,500,000 C
citizen in 55 sare km in ra currently
without any option or solution or any
hope in the Horizon for a solution for
the
situation Moen robani um what do you
make of what you just heard there from
from Yousef is Israel in breach of the
UN Court's ruling well I would argue
that it's more in breach of the ruling
today than it was on the day that the
ruling was issued um the the nature and
intensity of the Israeli Onslaught on
the Gaza Strip appears to be unchanged
um what has changed is a geographical
scope which as we've just heard has now
extended um to ra and the southern Gaza
Strip I think the other change is that
time is a factor um as we've just heard
what had been hunger and severe hunger a
month ago is now an actual famine we've
also seen that Israel continues um to
block Aid continues to shoot up Aid
convoys Snipes at um ambulances uh
killing killing their staff and so on so
I I really don't see anything any change
in Israeli conduct except for the worse
and with the additional Factor um of
time there's absolutely no reason that
any judgment that was valid last month
would um not be at least equally valid
today we'll leave the the legal argument
to Eve in just a moment but politically
what can be done to force Israel to
comply well this is a decision really
that is in the hands of Israel's Western
sponsors particularly um the United
States and the European Union um we had
a statement today I believe from the
White House um indicating that the
United States does not want to see any
combat in ra over the period of uh
Ramadan which begins in um around uh
March 10th because it's concerned about
the regional repercussions but what that
in effect does is give Israel a green
light to continue and even intensify its
campaign between now and um that day
it's quite clear that if the United
States wanted this to come to an end it
would take no more than a phone call
from the White House to the Israeli
Prime Minister and it would end
instantaneously they've made a choice
they have made a decision they have an
ideological commitment to Israel's
campaign they are supporting it without
qualification or reservations and the
consequences are um what we're seeing on
the ground and what um uh our guest in
uh in ra just informed us about Neeve uh
Neeve Gordon in London is is it possible
from a from a legal standpoint to
determined yet whether Israel is in
breach of the orders issued by the icj
requiring it to take steps to protect uh
Palestinians rights and to cease all
activities that could uh constitute
genocide I think it is possible to claim
that Israel is in breach but Israel is
also we are seeing that Israel is also
preparing a legal
defense it's not as the two first
speakers noted it's not changing really
its strategy on the ground but it's
actually instituting three notable uh
interventions to create a defense first
it's launching a series of Investigation
into particular incidents where it says
maybe war
crimes uh were carried out we we know
that from the past that these
investigations usually Target soldiers
and not commanders and surely not
political leaders and if we look at
2014 after Israel killed over 2,000
Palestinians it only one investigation
went through and in it two soldiers were
found guilty of stealing 200 drugs so I
don't think these investigations are
serious but legally they're very
important we also see how Israel's
attack on the United Nation relief and
work agency and the the idea behind this
attack is also a legal idea first it
wants to claim that many much of the
evidence provided by the south Afric in
the South African
application I is not true it was given
by un bodies and like the U like unra
they too could could be some way aligned
with quote unquote terrorist and
therefore we should not believe this
evidence and second it's using uh its
allegations against unra to stop or to
not totally stop but to kind of limit
the humanitarian Aid that's coming into
the Gaza Strip saying hey this is a
terrorist organization we need to look
closer into uh uh what what is being
brought in and third uh we see that
there's much less genocidal incitement
in the Israeli media but it's important
to to understand that the issue of
intent is not only the utterance of the
Israeli
politicians and Israeli soldiers but it
is also the kind of actions that Israel
is taking and so there's also the
question of circumstan intent namely if
Israel
attacks ra it will still
be a a South Africa will still be able
to claim that it is carrying out
genocide with intent NE just just
briefly if you can what legally then can
be done at this stage to force Israel to
comply I mean what are the implications
here for the icj and and its Authority
the there's a few questions here one is
that the icj itself is only a Judicial
arm it's not an executive arm and even
if tomorrow morning the
icj ruled on a seiz fire a rued that
immediately much more humanitarian aid
needs to come into Gaza the only arm
that can make Israel do that within the
United Nations framework is the security
Council the the icj itself has no
enforcement mechanism it's the security
Council that has to rule and decide on
enforcement mechanisms following an icj
ruling uh the I the South Africa can uh
uh uh uh apply again to the the icj and
say listen the the situation is getting
worse Israel's beginning Onslaught on
the ra on RAF it's much more dangerous
can you issue other measures such as a
full suspension of hostilities although
I would say that the first initial six
measures the only way to comply by them
is a suspension of hostilities namely a
seiz fire okay uh Yousef hamash picking
up on on what n was saying there you
touched upon it in in your one of your
first answers tell tell us more about
the situation on Aid to Gaza Israel
insists that it is enabling the entrance
of humanitarian Aid into Gaza and is
quote facilitating the transfer of any
amount of Aid requested the scope of
incoming Aid is only limited it says by
the handling capabilities of the UN and
other agencies in the Gaza Strip you're
saying though that there's been no
improvement in the delivery and
availability of Aid right yeah and
unfortunately if you look to the
Egyptian side you can see how many
trucks are waiting just to be allowed to
be entering that there is a huge problem
with the supply chain itself in terms of
Aid we usually assist and do our
assessment to clarify the needs that we
should cover urgently and unfortunately
within our the processing providing the
aid into Gaza the needs usually Chang
before we are we are we have the the a
tangibles in our hand unfortunately if
you go again to the Egyptian inside of
the Border you will see that hundreds of
trucks are waiting to be allowed to go
into the process that it's taking really
long the amount of trucks are not
covering 10% of the need yet 150 truck
is the average per day while we need to
recover at least a th000 truck per day
we as long we never we didn't reach that
number of trucks of a trucks into Gaza
we will still facing famine in the north
another catastrophic situation in the
middle area and another catastroph
situation in Rafa because we cannot we
are not able to do our role without
having the aid the aid is waiting on the
other side of the Border waiting to be
allowed on a daily basis they have to be
they have to the trucks need to be
scanned from both side the Egyptian side
and the Israeli side we were expecting
that after opening Kum Shalom that the
the number of a trucks will increase but
unfortunately we didn't see any
difference either before or after and
it's I don't think that we need to look
about the obligations related to to that
we need to think about it from a
humanitarian perspective there is a huge
need there is a
catastrophic crisis one of the most
complicated crisis on the planet and I
think without allowing 1,000 truck per
day we are going to face what we are
facing currently in the North and the
another thing to be highlighted that the
issue in Rafa are shading what's going
on on the North unfortunately because we
don't have access either for
communication information there we
cannot be on the ground to understand
exactly what's going on but what we
receive from relatives family members or
friends from the north it's
heartbreaking and our our hands are are
tight in front of that because we cannot
we don't have the ability to access to
the northern part and Gaza City to
provide assistance for families we we'll
be talking in depth about about this
whole Aid issue on our next in Side
Story on uh on Monday uh moan Rabani um
the icj's orders are a test not only of
the the courts Authority but of other
signatories to the genocide convention
why the deafening Silence from from many
of those Nations and and and what
pressure if any does Israel's failure to
comply with the Court's provisional
orders put on the US and and other uh
Israeli allies well the the Court's
rulings are binding on all State parties
to the genocide convention and that
includes the United States and that
includes each and every member state of
the European Union what we've
essentially seen since their initial
ruling is business as usual you take for
example the Netherlands where a number
of Human Rights organizations have sued
the Dutch government um seeking a court
order to order the government to stop
supplying spare parts for the isra
really F35 jets that are um raising the
Gaza Strip to the ground and the Court
ruled in favor of the government um that
its um uh reliability as a supplier and
as a um uh as a commercial supplier
trumped any other consideration such as
um the government's obligations um under
the genocide convention on Monday um
there there will be an appeal of of this
initial ruling and it will be very
interesting to see if this time um the
courts decide that yes um the genocide
convention does apply not only um to
adversaries and enemies of the west but
to um Western governments um as well in
terms of the United States I think we
have to recognize How Deeply
ideologically committed um President
Biden and his most senior AIDS are to an
Israeli Victory um their real issue with
Israel is is not what Israel is doing to
Palestinians but what Israel is not
doing to Palestinians in other words
Israel's failure to achieve a military
Victory against the Palestinian armed
organizations that is really the only
significant difference um between
Washington and the Israeli government
and and as Professor Gordon said um the
icj does not have enforcement mechanisms
and what we've seen as Western
governments essentially acting as if
they're free to ignore um their
obligations uh Visa V Israel and its
genocidal campaign in the Gaza Strip
Nave Gorton what does the law say about
countries like the US who hold influence
over Israel countries that are that are
also signatories to the genocide
convention what are their
responsibilities under international law
they certainly cannot be complicit with
genocide and I think What mo showed and
said is that there are several countri
countries now that have been complicit
with Israel's genocidal violence both by
uh supplying weapons and money and by
supplying political support and I I I
know that there are several lawyers now
preparing a case against the United
States and the UK governments for
complicity I know that the foreign
office in in in the UK has uh expressed
serious concerns about Israel's uh
committing war crimes in the Gaza Strip
at a time when the UK government
continues to transfer weapons to Israel
so I think these governments need to
also be careful and these leaders need
to be careful that history will not
judge them as being as taking part in in
in in one of the worst genocides in the
21st century Yousef hamash what would
your your message to the world be right
now on on this issue of whether or not
Israel is complying with the icj's
orders yeah is Israel not being applying
to the icj put a new commitment to the
world leaders and International
Community to do their role unfortunately
since the beginning of this war we
didn't see a real action from the
worldly as us as which represent itself
as a country who is leading the world
unfortunately we are not
seeing a real effort towards stopping
that's what's going on and what what's
going what's taking place in Gaza is
inhuman and we don't see a real action
from the International Community and
world leaders once again we are failing
and the International Community is
failing us as Palestinian here in Gaza
we from the International Community to
the
un the security Council the United
Nation now the icj I think that no more
effort can be done for Palestinians and
that was the last step that could be
done towards trying to save the lives of
Palestinians in in Gaza under this
madness and we don't see a real action
and unfortunately they had to stand
ahead their responsibilities because
they will held responsible in front of
us and the history itself What mo Rabani
what are the implications then for the
Israeli political establishment on on
deciding whether to comply or not with
the Court's provisional orders and and
is Israel's military in lock step here
with the government or is or is there
some unease in the military I'm I'm sure
there's um unease at the level of both
the political and um military leadership
unease about being put under scrutiny
and I think unease at the tremendous
moral and political loss that they've
incurred by now being found to be
plausibly committing genocide
particularly given that Israel is so
reliant on the Goodwill of Western
public opinion and that much of that
support comes from the image of Israel
as being somehow reparations for the
Nazi Holocaust um now Israel is
associated with genocide as a
perpetrator and not only as a victim so
this will have severe um long-term
consequences but I think in the present
moment I think the Israeli leadership is
isn't really looking at the fine points
of the law it's not even looking at the
he and Netanyahu was very clear that he
won't be affected by anything coming out
of the ha in terms of this military
campaign he's looking at Washington and
he's looking at Brussels those are his
political and for that matter legal
terms of reference um and it will be on
the basis of what emanates from those
two capitals that he will decide what he
will and will not do next naeve do you
want to pick up on on what was saying
there Israel of course has a history of
pushing the limits of international law
right I I wonder to what extent Israel's
government is is is circumventing its
own domestic legal system to justify its
its actions in
Gaza well we have not seen a substantial
increase in humanitarian as demanded by
the court we have not seen a significant
change in the repertoire of violence
deployed is in Gaza and a decrease in
the killing of civilians
indeed I think uh we we're seeing the
same level of Civilian death as we saw
before the Court ruling so again it's a
controversion of the court and we have
not seen any indictments and even
investigations of those inciting
genocidal violence again as demanded by
the court so the Israeli government I
think has decided that in many ways it
is going to ignore the code Court we do
see the legal
establishment as I pointed out earlier
preparing a legal defense but I think we
also have to remember that netan has an
a personal interest to continue with
this uh war on the Palestinian people
because he knows that the minute he will
stop this war then uh he will be under
immense investigation and the Israeli
public will demand his resignation so
the only uh uh what is keeping netan
actually in power is the war and
therefore he he's saying as I think Moen
Rabani said before that despite what the
International Community said despite
what the court said despite even what
the president of the United States has
said he's going on and and instructing
the military to go into the into RAF and
uh so I think there's now a kind
of clash between a certain legal
establishment within Israel that that
still respects the idea of the
icj and uh and the political and
Military leadership in the country all
right there gentlemen I'm afraid we're
going to have to end it many thanks to
you all Yousef hamash Moen Rabani and Ne
Gordon as always thanks for watching you
can see the program again at any time by
going to the website at al.com for
further discussion join us at our
Facebook page at
facebook.com/ AJ insidestory and of
course you can join the conversation on
XR handle there at AJ inside story from
me Adrien finigan and the team here in
Doha see you again bye for
[Music]
now